add tutorial for content filtering subscription. (#2441)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Content-Filtering-Subscription.rst

Content Filtering Subscription
==============================

**Goal:** Create a content filtering subscription.

**Tutorial level:** Advanced

**Time:** 15 minutes

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 1
   :local:

Overview
--------

> ROS 2 applications typically consist of topics to transmit the data from publishers to subscriptions.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
ROS 2 applications typically consist of topics to transmit data from publishers to subscriptions.
```

> Basically subscriptions receive all published data from publishers on the topic.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
Basically, subscriptions receive all published data from publishers on the topic.
```

> But sometimes a subscription might be interested in only a subset of the data which is being sent by publishers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But sometimes, a subscription might be interested in only a subset of the data which is being sent by publishers.
```

> A content filtering subscription can support a content-based subscription, so that the subscription only receives the data which is interesting for the application.

Reviewer: Minor rephrasing, current wording seems a bit redundant IMHO:

```suggestion
A content filtering subscription allows to receive only the data of interest for the application.
```

> In this demo we'll be highlighting how to manage content filtering subscriptions and how it works.

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
In this demo, we'll be highlighting how to create a content filtering subscription and how they work.
```

RMW Support
-----------

> Content filtering subscriptions require RMW implementation support to enable content-based subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Content filtering subscriptions require RMW implementation support.
```

.. list-table::  Content-Filtering-Subscription Support Status
   :widths: 25 25

   * - rmw_fastrtps
     - supported
   * - rmw_connextdds
     - supported
   * - rmw_cyclonedds
     - not supported

> Currently all RMW implementations that support content filtering subscriptions are `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__ implementations, and ROS 2 just depends on these implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently all RMW implementations that support content filtering subscriptions are `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__ based.
```

> That means that the supported filtering expressions and parameters are also dependent on `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__, you can refer to `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/PDF>`__ ``Annex B - Syntax for Queries and Filters`` for details.

Reviewer 2: It would be great, in the future, to move away from this, instead defining our own set of filter expressions we support in ros 2, likely a subset of what dds provides. Depending on dds to define our interface isn't desirable long term.

Author: totally agree with you. i think we need to implement that aligned with fallback filtering.

Installing the demo
-------------------

See the :doc:`installation instructions <../Installation>` for details on installing ROS 2.

If you've installed ROS 2 from packages, ensure that you have ``ros-{DISTRO}-demo-nodes-cpp`` installed.
If you downloaded the archive or built ROS 2 from source, it will already be part of the installation.

Temperature filtering demo
--------------------------

> This demo is designed to show how a content filtering subscription works for emergency temperature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This demo shows how a content filtering subscription can be used to only receive tempareture values that are out of the acceptable temparture range, detecting emergencies.
```

> The content filtering subscription filters out the uninteresting temperature data so that the subscription callback is not issued.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content filtering subscription filters out the uninteresting temperature data, so that the subscription callback is not issued.
```

ContentFilteringPublisher:

> https://github.com/ros2/demos/blob/{REPOS_FILE_BRANCH}/demo_nodes_cpp/src/topics/content_filtering_publisher.cpp

Reviewer: did we have a way to just link to a code block without copy-pasting it?
I think that was possible.

            if (temperature_ > TEMPERATURE_SETTING[1]) {
              temperature_ = TEMPERATURE_SETTING[0];
            }
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Publishing: '%f'", msg_->data);
            // Put the message into a queue to be processed by the middleware.
            // This call is non-blocking.
            pub_->publish(std::move(msg_));
          };
        // Create a publisher with a custom Quality of Service profile.
        // Uniform initialization is suggested so it can be trivially changed to
        // rclcpp::KeepAll{} if the user wishes.
        // (rclcpp::KeepLast(7) -> rclcpp::KeepAll() fails to compile)
        rclcpp::QoS qos(rclcpp::KeepLast{7});
        pub_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::Float32>("temperature", qos);

        // Use a timer to schedule periodic message publishing.
        timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(1s, publish_message);
      }

    private:
      float temperature_ = TEMPERATURE_SETTING[0];
      std::unique_ptr<std_msgs::msg::Float32> msg_;
      rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::Float32>::SharedPtr pub_;
      rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr timer_;
    };

    }  // namespace demo_nodes_cpp

> When using a content filtering subscription, all of the management has to be done on subscriptions as receivers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content filter is defined in the subscription side, publishers don't need to be configured in any special way to allow content filtering.
```

> The ``ContentFilteringPublisher`` node creates a publisher that publishes simulated temperature data starting from -100.0 and ending at 150.0 with a step size of 10.0 every second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``ContentFilteringPublisher`` node publishes simulated temperature data starting from -100.0 and ending at 150.0 with a step size of 10.0 every second.
```

    [INFO] [1651094612.822692231] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '80.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094613.822745549] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '90.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094614.822701982] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '100.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094615.822691465] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '110.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094616.822649070] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '120.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094617.822693616] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '130.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094618.822691832] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '140.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094619.822688452] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '150.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094620.822645327] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '-100.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094621.822689219] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '-90.000000'
    [INFO] [1651094622.822694292] [content_filtering_publisher]: Publishing: '-80.000000'
    [...]

ContentFilteringSubscriber:

https://github.com/ros2/demos/blob/{REPOS_FILE_BRANCH}/demo_nodes_cpp/src/topics/content_filtering_subscriber.cpp

> .. code-block:: c++

Reviewer: same about trying to avoid copy pasting the code here, and just linking to it.

        // are less than -30 or greater than 100.
        rclcpp::SubscriptionOptions sub_options;
        sub_options.content_filter_options.filter_expression = "data < %0 OR data > %1";
        sub_options.content_filter_options.expression_parameters = {
          std::to_string(EMERGENCY_TEMPERATURE[0]),
          std::to_string(EMERGENCY_TEMPERATURE[1])
        };

        sub_ = create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::Float32>("temperature", 10, callback, sub_options);

        if (!sub_->is_cft_enabled()) {
          RCLCPP_WARN(
            this->get_logger(), "Content filter is not enabled since it's not supported");
        } else {
          RCLCPP_INFO(
            this->get_logger(),
            "subscribed to topic \"%s\" with content filter options \"%s, {%s}\"",
            sub_->get_topic_name(),
            sub_options.content_filter_options.filter_expression.c_str(),
            rcpputils::join(sub_options.content_filter_options.expression_parameters, ", ").c_str());
        }
      }

    private:
      rclcpp::Subscription<std_msgs::msg::Float32>::SharedPtr sub_;
    };

    }  // namespace demo_nodes_cpp

> To enable a content filtering subscription, applications can set filtering expression and expression parameters in ``SubscriptionOptions`` to describe the requirement and criteria while creating the subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable content filtering, applications can set the filtering expression and the expression parameters in ``SubscriptionOptions``.
```

> The application can also check if content filtering subscription is enabled on the subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application can also check if content filtering is enabled on the subscription.
```

> In this demo, the ``ContentFilteringSubscriber`` node creates the content filtering subscription that receives temperature data only if the temperature data is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this demo, the ``ContentFilteringSubscriber`` node creates a content filtering subscription that receives a message only if the temperature value is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.
```

As explained before, content filtering subscription depends on the RMW implementation.

> Applications can use the ``is_cft_enabled`` method to check if the content filtering is enabled on the subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As commented before, content filtering subscription support depends on the RMW implementation.
Applications can use the ``is_cft_enabled`` method to check if content filtering is actually enabled on the subscription.
```

    [INFO] [1651094618.823315527] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [140.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094619.823331424] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [150.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094620.823271748] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-100.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094621.823343550] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-90.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094622.823286326] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-80.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094623.823371031] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-70.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094624.823333112] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-60.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094625.823266469] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-50.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094626.823284093] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-40.000000]

> You should see the message that explains content filtering subscription is enabled and it receives messages only if temperature data is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see a message showing the content filtering options used and logs for each message received only if the temperature value is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.
```

> If a content filtering subscription cannot be enabled since the RMW implementation does not support it, the application can still create the normal subscription successfully without content filtering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If content filtering is not supported by the RMW implementation, the subscription will still be created without content filtering enabled.
```

> We can run this case by executing ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_cyclonedds_cpp ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp content_filtering_publisher`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can try that by executing ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_cyclonedds_cpp ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp content_filtering_publisher``.
```

.. redirect-from::

>     Content-Filtering-Subscription

Reviewer 3: Since this is a new tutorial, no need to add a redirect here.

Content Filtering Subscription
==============================

**Goal:** Create a content filtering subscription.

> **Tutorial level:** Intermediate

Reviewer 3: I'll suggest that this is an "Advanced" tutorial, though this is somewhat subjective.

Author: agree, i was wondering if either intermediate or advanced. thanks!

**Time:** 15 minutes

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 1
   :local:

Overview
--------

> ROS applications typically consist of topics to transmit the data from publishers to subscriptions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ROS 2 applications typically consist of topics to transmit the data from publishers to subscriptions.
```

Basically subscriptions receive all published data from publishers on the topic.
But sometimes subscription might be interested in only a subset of the data which is being sent by publishers.
Content filtering subscription can support a content-based subscription, so that subscription can only receive the data which is interesting for the application.

In this demo we'll be highlighting how to manage content filtering subscription and how it works.

RMW Support
-----------

Content filtering subscription requires RMW implementation support to enable content-based subscription.

.. list-table::  Content-Filtering-Subscription Support Status
   :widths: 25 25

   * - rmw_fastrtps
     - supported
   * - rmw_connextdds
     - supported
   * - rmw_cyclonedds
     - not supported

Filtering expression and parameters

> -----------------------------------

Reviewer 3: I don't think we actually need a separate heading here; the content below is still talking about RMW implementations.  So I'd just remove these two lines.

> Currently all RMW implementation that support content filtering subscription are `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__ implementation, and ROS 2 just depends on these implementations.
> That says supported filtering expression and parameters are also dependent on `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__, you can refer to `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/PDF>`__ ``Annex B - Syntax for Queries and Filters`` for details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently all RMW implementations that support content filtering subscription are `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__ implementations.
That means that the supported filtering expressions and parameters are also dependent on `DDS <https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/>`__, you can refer to `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/PDF>`__ ``Annex B - Syntax for Queries and Filters`` for details.
```

            if (temperature_ > TEMPERATURE_SETTING[1]) {
              temperature_ = TEMPERATURE_SETTING[0];
            }
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Publishing: '%f'", msg_->data);
            // Put the message into a queue to be processed by the middleware.
            // This call is non-blocking.
            pub_->publish(std::move(msg_));
          };
        // Create a publisher with a custom Quality of Service profile.
        // Uniform initialization is suggested so it can be trivially changed to
        // rclcpp::KeepAll{} if the user wishes.
        // (rclcpp::KeepLast(7) -> rclcpp::KeepAll() fails to compile)
        rclcpp::QoS qos(rclcpp::KeepLast{7});
        pub_ = this->create_publisher<std_msgs::msg::Float32>("temperature", qos);

        // Use a timer to schedule periodic message publishing.
        timer_ = this->create_wall_timer(1s, publish_message);
      }

    private:
      float temperature_ = TEMPERATURE_SETTING[0];
      std::unique_ptr<std_msgs::msg::Float32> msg_;
      rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::Float32>::SharedPtr pub_;
      rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr timer_;
    };

    }  // namespace demo_nodes_cpp

> For using content filtering subscription, all of the management have to be done on subscriptions as receivers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using content filtering subscription, all of the management have to be done on subscriptions as receivers.
```

> ``ContentFilteringPublisher`` node creates publisher that publishes simulated temperature data starts from -100.0 and ends at 150.0 with a step size of 10.0 every second.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``ContentFilteringPublisher`` node creates a publisher that publishes simulated temperature data starting from -100.0 and ending at 150.0 with a step size of 10.0 every second.
```

        // are less than -30 or greater than 100.
        rclcpp::SubscriptionOptions sub_options;
        sub_options.content_filter_options.filter_expression = "data < %0 OR data > %1";
        sub_options.content_filter_options.expression_parameters = {
          std::to_string(EMERGENCY_TEMPERATURE[0]),
          std::to_string(EMERGENCY_TEMPERATURE[1])
        };

        sub_ = create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::Float32>("temperature", 10, callback, sub_options);

        if (!sub_->is_cft_enabled()) {
          RCLCPP_WARN(
            this->get_logger(), "Content filter is not enabled since it's not supported");
        } else {
          RCLCPP_INFO(
            this->get_logger(),
            "subscribed to topic \"%s\" with content filter options \"%s, {%s}\"",
            sub_->get_topic_name(),
            sub_options.content_filter_options.filter_expression.c_str(),
            rcpputils::join(sub_options.content_filter_options.expression_parameters, ", ").c_str());
        }
      }

    private:
      rclcpp::Subscription<std_msgs::msg::Float32>::SharedPtr sub_;
    };

    }  // namespace demo_nodes_cpp

> To enable content filtering subscription, application can set filtering expression and expression parameters in ``SubscriptionOptions`` to describe the requirement and criteria while creating subscription.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable content filtering subscription, applications can set filtering expression and expression parameters in ``SubscriptionOptions`` to describe the requirement and criteria while creating the subscription.
```

> Application can also check if content filtering subscription is enabled on the subscription.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The application can also check if content filtering subscription is enabled on the subscription.
```

> In this demo, ``ContentFilteringSubscriber`` node creates the content filtering subscription that receives temperature data only if the temperature data is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this demo, the ``ContentFilteringSubscriber`` node creates the content filtering subscription that receives temperature data only if the temperature data is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.
```

> As explained before, content filtering subscription depends on RMW implementation.
> Application uses ``is_cft_enabled`` method to check if the content filtering is enabled on the subscription.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As explained before, content filtering subscription depends on the RMW implementation.
Applications can use the ``is_cft_enabled`` method to check if the content filtering is enabled on the subscription.
```

    [INFO] [1651094619.823331424] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [150.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094620.823271748] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-100.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094621.823343550] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-90.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094622.823286326] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-80.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094623.823371031] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-70.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094624.823333112] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-60.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094625.823266469] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-50.000000]
    [INFO] [1651094626.823284093] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive an emergency temperature data: [-40.000000]

You should see the message that explains content filtering subscription is enabled and it receives messages only if temperature data is less than -30.0 or greater than 100.0.

> If content filtering subscription cannot be enabled since RMW implementation does not support, application can still create the normal subscription successfully without content filtering.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If content filtering subscription cannot be enabled since RMW implementation does not support it, the application can still create the normal subscription successfully without content filtering.
```

    [INFO] [1651096648.245934569] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [-30.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096649.245877906] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [-20.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096650.245939068] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [-10.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096651.245911450] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [0.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096652.245879830] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [10.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096653.245858329] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [20.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096654.245916370] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [30.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096655.245933741] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [40.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096656.245833975] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [50.000000]
    [INFO] [1651096657.245971483] [content_filtering_subscriber]: I receive a temperature data: [60.000000]

> You can see the message ``Content filter is not enabled`` because underlying RMW implementation does not support, but successfully create the normal subscription to receive all temperature data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can see the message ``Content filter is not enabled`` because underlying RMW implementation does not support the feature, but the demo still successfully creates the normal subscription to receive all temperature data.
```

> Related contents
> ----------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Related content
---------------
```
